README.md, before:

# Metadata Warehouse

## Docker Compose Setup

This repo contains a `docker-compose.yml` file which configures the containers and their interaction.
To run the containers:
- users and passwords (adjust env variables as needed and set new passwords):
  ```sh
  cp env.template .env
  ```
  Optionally add the following env variables for postgres and/or OpenSearch (not needed for local dev):
    - `POSTGRES_ADDRESS` (default "postgres") and `POSTGRES_PORT` (default 5432)
    - `OPENSEARCH_ADDRESS` (default "opensearch") and `OPENSEARCH_PORT` (default 9200)
- API keys for mcp server:
  ```sh
  cp keys.env.template keys.env
  ```
- Dev config for docker containers:
  ```sh
  cp docker-compose.override.yml.template docker-compose.override.yml
  ```
- ```sh
  docker compose up -d
  ```
- create postgreSQL table structure, see below.
- create OpenSearch index, see below.
- run transformation process, see below.

## pgAdmin 

- when using pgAdmin, register a new server with `Host name` "postgres" (container name in docker network) with port "5432".  
- provide credentials as defined in `.env`.

# Basic Setup

- ```shell
  cd scripts
  ```
- Install [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) and run 
  ```sh
  uv sync
  ```
  
## Create Postgres DB and Load and Transform Data

- ```sh
  cd scripts/postgres_data
  ```

- create table structure and repo config as defined in `scripts/postgres_data/create_sql` 
  (to start from scratch, you have to remove the tables first with [DROP](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-droptable.html)): 
  ```sh
  uv run create_db.py
  ```

- load XML data from `scripts/postgres_data/data` (populates table `harvest_events`): 
  ```sh
   uv run import_data.py
   ```

- transform data from `scripts/postgres_data/data` to a local dir 
  (to test transformation, alternative to using the Celery process): 
  ```sh
  uv run transform.py -i harvests_{repo_suffix} -o {repo_suffix}_json -s JSON_schema_file [-n]
  ```
  If the -n flag is provided, the JSON data will also be normalized and validated against the JSON schema file `utils/schema.json`.

## Create OpenSearch Index 

- ```sh
  cd scripts/opensearch_data
  ```

- create `test_datacite` index (deletes existing `test_datacite` index): 

  ```sh
  uv run create_index.py
  ```

- for sample OpenSearch queries, see [open_search_queries](docs/open_search_queries.md)
- to test queries requiring vector embeddings, run
  ```sh
  uv run query_index.py
  ```

## Run Transformation Process

The transformer container provides an [API](http://127.0.0.1:8080/docs) to start the transformation and indexing process.

- check if transformer container is up and running:
  ```sh
  http://127.0.0.1:8080/health
  ```
- start transformation process:
  ```sh
  http://127.0.0.1:8080/index?index_name=test_datacite
  ```
- see transformation task results in flower:
  ```sh
  http://127.0.0.1:5555/tasks
  ```

Commit message:

Add route for harvesting config (#24)
* feat (config): add route for harvesting config

* feat (transform): add route to create harvest event

* feat (transform): add route to create harvest event

* feat (transform): add route to create harvest event

* fix (mypy): fix typing issue

* fix (mypy): fix typing issue

* refactor (import): fix encoding problem

* feat (transform): add route to create harvest run

* refactor (table structure): remove endpoint code

* feat (transform): Use UPSERT operation when writing to records table

* feat (transform): define a  partial unique index for harvest_runs

* feat (harvest run): create a new harvest run with from date based on past harvest run, if any

* feat (harvest event): link harvest_event to harvest_run

* feat (harvest run): close harvest run

* fix (typing): fix type issues

* feat (harvest run): close harvest run

* feat (additional metadata): add additional metadata params

* feat (import): store additional metadata in harvest_events

* feat (harvest events): add is_deleted flag

* feat (harvest runs): get open harvest run for given harvest url, if any

* refactor (index): index all harvest events belonging to a completed harvest run

* feat (transform): add repo info to records in batch

* feat (transform): add additional metadata

* feat (transform): delete records if flagged as deleted

* refactor (fastapi): improve documentation and error handling

* refactor (schema): simplify DB schema, add datestamp to harvest event message

* refactor (import): make fastapi address configurable

* fix (harvest run): close a failed harvest run

* refactor (import data): improve code

* refactor (transform): OpenSearch client is not idempotent by default

* chore (endpoints): adapt set name for DABAR

* fix (DABAR): adapt to new settings in DABAR

* refactor (import): use iterator pattern for files in data dir

README.md, after:

# Metadata Warehouse

## Docker Compose Setup

This repo contains a `docker-compose.yml` file which configures the containers and their interaction.
To run the containers:
- users and passwords (adjust env variables as needed and set new passwords):
  ```sh
  cp env.template .env
  ```
  Optionally add the following env variables for postgres and/or OpenSearch (not needed for local dev):
    - `POSTGRES_ADDRESS` (default "postgres") and `POSTGRES_PORT` (default 5432)
    - `OPENSEARCH_ADDRESS` (default "opensearch") and `OPENSEARCH_PORT` (default 9200)
    - `FASTAPI_ADDRESS` (default "127.0.0.1")
- API keys for mcp server:
  ```sh
  cp keys.env.template keys.env
  ```
- Dev config for docker containers:
  ```sh
  cp docker-compose.override.yml.template docker-compose.override.yml
  ```
- ```sh
  docker compose up -d
  ```
- create postgreSQL table structure, see below.
- create OpenSearch index, see below.
- run transformation process, see below.

## pgAdmin 

- when using pgAdmin, register a new server with `Host name` "postgres" (container name in docker network) with port "5432".  
- provide credentials as defined in `.env`.

# Basic Setup

- ```shell
  cd scripts
  ```
- Install [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) and run 
  ```sh
  uv sync
  ```
  
## Create Postgres DB and Load and Transform Data

- ```sh
  cd scripts/postgres_data
  ```

- create table structure and repo config as defined in `scripts/postgres_data/create_sql` 
  (to start from scratch, you have to remove the tables first with [DROP](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-droptable.html)): 
  ```sh
  uv run create_db.py
  ```

- load XML data from `scripts/postgres_data/data` (populates table `harvest_events`): 
  ```sh
   uv run import_data.py
   ```

- transform data from `scripts/postgres_data/data` to a local dir 
  (to test transformation, alternative to using the Celery process): 
  ```sh
  uv run transform.py -i harvests_{repo_suffix} -o {repo_suffix}_json -s JSON_schema_file [-n]
  ```
  If the -n flag is provided, the JSON data will also be normalized and validated against the JSON schema file `utils/schema.json`.

## Create OpenSearch Index 

- ```sh
  cd scripts/opensearch_data
  ```

- create `test_datacite` index (deletes existing `test_datacite` index): 

  ```sh
  uv run create_index.py
  ```

- for sample OpenSearch queries, see [open_search_queries](docs/open_search_queries.md)
- to test queries requiring vector embeddings, run
  ```sh
  uv run query_index.py
  ```

## Run Transformation Process

The transformer container provides an [API](http://127.0.0.1:8080/docs) to start the transformation and indexing process.

A transformation requires a `harvest_run_id`. 
When running the script `import_data.py` (scripts/postgres_data/data),
for each endpoint a harves run is created, the single OAI-PMH records are registered as harvest events,
and the harvest run is then closed. Note that a transformation can only be performed for a closed harvest run.

- check if transformer container is up and running:
  ```sh
  http://127.0.0.1:8080/health
  ```

- To obtain a harvest run id and status for a given endpoint (https://dabar.srce.hr/oai):
```sh
  http://127.0.0.1:8080/harvest_run?harvest_url=https%3A%2F%2Fdabar.srce.hr%2Foai 
```

- start transformation process:
  ```sh
  http://127.0.0.1:8080/index?harvest_run_id=xyz
  ```
- see transformation task results in flower:
  ```sh
  http://127.0.0.1:5555/tasks
  ```
